{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf949\cocoasubrtf270
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 LucidaGrande;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc2\leveljcn2\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid0\'02\'05.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}}{\listname ;}\listid1}
{\list\listtemplateid2\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc2\leveljcn2\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid0\'02\'05.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}}{\listname ;}\listid2}
{\list\listtemplateid3\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc2\leveljcn2\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid0\'02\'05.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}}{\listname ;}\listid3}
{\list\listtemplateid4\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc2\leveljcn2\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid0\'02\'05.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}}{\listname ;}\listid4}
{\list\listtemplateid5\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc2\leveljcn2\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid0\'02\'05.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}}{\listname ;}\listid5}
{\list\listtemplateid6\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc2\leveljcn2\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid0\'02\'05.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}}{\listname ;}\listid6}
{\list\listtemplateid7\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc2\leveljcn2\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid0\'02\'05.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}}{\listname ;}\listid7}
{\list\listtemplateid8\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc2\leveljcn2\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid0\'02\'05.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}}{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc2\leveljcn2\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{hyphen\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'02\'05.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}}{\listname ;}\listid8}
{\list\listtemplateid9\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc2\leveljcn2\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid0\'02\'05.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}}{\listname ;}\listid9}
{\list\listtemplateid10\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc2\leveljcn2\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid0\'02\'05.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}}{\listname ;}\listid10}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}{\listoverride\listid2\listoverridecount0\ls2}{\listoverride\listid3\listoverridecount0\ls3}{\listoverride\listid4\listoverridecount0\ls4}{\listoverride\listid5\listoverridecount0\ls5}{\listoverride\listid6\listoverridecount0\ls6}{\listoverride\listid7\listoverridecount0\ls7}{\listoverride\listid8\listoverridecount0\ls8}{\listoverride\listid9\listoverridecount0\ls9}{\listoverride\listid10\listoverridecount0\ls10}}
\paperw5760\paperh8640\margl1440\margr1440\vieww17420\viewh15680\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sa80\ql\qnatural

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 XaoS Real-Time Fractal Zoomer for Mac OS X, Version 3.3\
\pard\pardeftab720\ql\qnatural

\b0 \cf0 \
Originally written by Jan Hubicka and Thomas Marsh\
Currently maintained by Zoltan Kovacs (kovzol@math.u-szeged.hu)\
Ported to Mac OS X By J.B. Langston III (jb-langston@austin.rr.com)\
\'a0\
Current version: \
XaoS Homepage: {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://xaos.sf.net/"}}{\fldrslt http://xaos.sf.net/}}\
\'a0\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa80\ql\qnatural

\b \cf0 About\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa80\ql\qnatural

\b0 \cf0 XaoS is an incredible program that lets you explore fractals by zooming in and out in real time.\'a0 If you\'92ve only used static fractal viewers like Fractint or UltraFractal before, zooming into a fractal as a real time animation is incredible.\'a0 XaoS was originally written by Jan Hubicka and Thomas Marsh, and is currently maintained by Zoltan Kovacs.  I contributed the Mac OS X user interface and made binaries available for ease of use. XaoS is free software available under the terms of the GNU General Public License.\
\pard\pardeftab720\ql\qnatural
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa80\ql\qnatural

\b \cf0 Installation and Usage\
\pard\pardeftab720\ql\qnatural

\b0 \cf0 After downloading the XaoS binary, just copy it to your applications folder and run the program. Basic usage is really pretty simple.\'a0\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\ql\qnatural
\ls1\ilvl0\cf0 {\listtext	\'95	}Point your mouse at the part of the image you want to zoom in on, and hold down the mouse button.\'a0 Away you go!\'a0\
{\listtext	\'95	}To zoom back out, hold down the control key and click.\'a0 Or, right click with a two-button mouse.\'a0\
{\listtext	\'95	}To pan, hold down the shift key and drag. On a three-button mouse, drag with the center button.\'a0 If you have a mouse with a scroll wheel, pressing down on the scroll wheel usually works like the center button.\
{\listtext	\'95	}To go full-screen, select UI->Drivers->Mac OS X Fullscreen Driver from the menu.  In full screen mode, the menu is only displayed when you move the mouse near the top of the screen. After going full screen, you can quit by pressing \uc0\u8984 Q, or you can go back to windowed mode by selecting UI->Drivers->Mac OS X Windowed Driver.\
\pard\pardeftab720\ql\qnatural
\cf0 \'a0\
To learn more, check out the tutorials from the Help menu.\'a0 They are really informative and a lot of fun to watch.\'a0 For more in-depth information, use the online help.\
\'a0\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa80\ql\qnatural

\b \cf0 Testing\
\pard\pardeftab720\ql\qnatural

\b0 \cf0 I developed this port on Mac OS X 10.4.6 on a dual 2Ghz Power Mac G5.\'a0 I would appreciate bug reports and suggestion from anyone. \'a0So far, I have confirmation that it works on the following machines:\
\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\ql\qnatural
\ls2\ilvl0\cf0 {\listtext	\'95	}MacBook (Intel Core Duo 1.83GHz) with Tiger\
{\listtext	\'95	}iBook (933MHz G4) with Panther (10.3.9)\
{\listtext	\'95	}PowerMac (4 x 2.5Ghz G5) with Tiger (10.4.6)\
{\listtext	\'95	}PowerMac (2 x 2.0Ghz G5) with Tiger (10.4.6)\
{\listtext	\'95	}iMac (Intel Core Duo 2.0Ghz) with Tiger\
\pard\pardeftab720\ql\qnatural
\cf0 \'a0\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa80\ql\qnatural

\b \cf0 Wish List\
\pard\pardeftab720\ql\qnatural

\b0 \cf0 These are the additional features that I eventually plan to add to the Mac OS X version.\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\ql\qnatural
\ls3\ilvl0\cf0 {\listtext	\'95	}Use native Mac OS X dialog boxes and help system\
{\listtext	\'95	}Replace QuickDraw with Quartz or OpenGL\
\pard\pardeftab720\ql\qnatural
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\ql\qnatural

\b \cf0 Known Issues\
\pard\pardeftab720\ql\qnatural

\b0 \cf0 The following are known issues with the current version of XaoS for Mac OS X.  So far, I haven't had the time or haven't been able to figure out how to fix them.  If you are a programmer and want to fix them, I would welcome your help!\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\ql\qnatural
\ls4\ilvl0\cf0 {\listtext	\'95	}Catseye fractal does not render properly.\'a0 \uc0\u8232 
\b Workaround
\b0 : Set the bailout to just over 4 (e.g., 4.000000001). After changing this setting, the fractal renders as expected.\
{\listtext	\'95	}Edge detection and edge detection 2 filters do not work.\uc0\u8232 
\b Workaround
\b0 : also enable the palette emulator filter at the same time.  This allows the filters to work as expected.\
{\listtext	\'95	}Pseudo 3d filter does not work.\'a0Unfortunately, there is no known workaround at this time.\
{\listtext	\'95	}No support for multiple languages.\
\pard\pardeftab720\ql\qnatural
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa80\ql\qnatural

\b \cf0 Revision History\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa80\ql\qnatural

\b0 \cf0 3.3-pre1\
Release Date: 3/9/2008\
\
Changes since 3.2.2:\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\sa80\ql\qnatural
\ls5\ilvl0\cf0 {\listtext	\'95	}Added user formula support using SFFE/GSL library.\
{\listtext	\'95	}Fixed bug where colors display incorrectly on Intel Macs after switching from full screen back to windowed driver.\
{\listtext	\'95	}Upgraded libpng to 1.2.25.\
{\listtext	\'95	}Included libgsl 1.10.\
{\listtext	\'95	}Updated build instructions with easier third party library build process.\
{\listtext	\'95	}Added performance mode, which inhibits text display (useful for VJing).\
{\listtext	\'95	}Fixed bug where color cycling would stop when moving from forward cycling to reverse.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa80\ql\qnatural
\cf0 \
\
3.2.2 \
Release Date: 9/26/2006\
\
Changes since Beta 4:\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\sa80\ql\qnatural
\ls6\ilvl0\cf0 {\listtext	\'95	}Fixed bug which was preventing XaoS from rendering images over 2500x2500\
{\listtext	\'95	}Added fullscreen driver\
{\listtext	\'95	}Upgraded libpng to 1.2.12\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa80\ql\qnatural
\cf0 \
3.2.1 Beta 4\
\pard\pardeftab720\ql\qnatural
\cf0 Release Date: 7/8/2006\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\ql\qnatural
\ls7\ilvl0\cf0 	\
\pard\pardeftab720\ql\qnatural
\cf0 Changes since Beta 3:\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\ql\qnatural
\ls8\ilvl0\cf0 {\listtext	\'95	}Fixed bug with colors on Intel Macs (default colors previously showed yellow instead of blue)\
{\listtext	\'95	}Fixed bug that prevented render animation option from working correctly\
{\listtext	\'95	}Added -windowsize and -autoscreensize command line arguments\
\pard\tx940\tx1440\pardeftab720\li1440\fi-1440\ql\qnatural
\ls8\ilvl1\cf0 	-windowsize allows you to specify the window size on the command line\
	-autoscreensize causes XaoS to attempt to automatically detect the pysical screen size\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa80\ql\qnatural
\cf0 \
3.2.1 Beta 3\
\pard\pardeftab720\ql\qnatural
\cf0 Release Date: 6/27/2006\
\
Changes since Beta 2:\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\ql\qnatural
\ls9\ilvl0\cf0 {\listtext	\'95	}Support saving to png. libpng is included as a private framework.\
{\listtext	\'95	}Changed icon to match XaoS default image\
{\listtext	\'95	}Provide standard Mac OS keyboard shortcuts for applicable functions -- redo, undo, save, load\
{\listtext	\'95	}Repackaged as a disk image with Readme fil\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa80\ql\qnatural
\cf0 3.2.1 Beta 2\
\pard\pardeftab720\ql\qnatural
\cf0 Release Date: 6/20/2006\
\
Changes since Beta 1:\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\ql\qnatural
\ls10\ilvl0\cf0 {\listtext	\'95	}Keyboard input has been implemented for all keys supported by XaoS.\
{\listtext	\'95	}Fixed bug where window events were not handled if driver was reinitialized.\
{\listtext	\'95	}Tutorials now play back.\
{\listtext	\'95	}Random examples now load.\
{\listtext	\'95	}Since Mac OS X doesn't allow single menu items directly in the menubar, I put "Stop Replay" for animation mode in the UI menu\
{\listtext	\'95	}Mac OS X applications have their own quit command in the Application menu.\'a0 So I removed the quit menu and preceeding separator from the file menu.\
{\listtext	\'95	}Swapped order of UI and Help menus in animation mode to comply with Human Interface Guidelines.\
\pard\pardeftab720\ql\qnatural
\cf0 \'a0\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa80\ql\qnatural
\cf0 3.2.1 Beta 1\
\pard\pardeftab720\ql\qnatural
\cf0 Release Date: 6/15/2006\
\'a0\
This was the original public release of XaoS for Mac OS X.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\ql\qnatural

\b \cf0 About Free Software\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by\
the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or (at your option) any later version.\
\
This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU General Public License for more details.\
\
You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along with this program; it is displayable from the program's online help feature.  If not, you can find it on the Internet at http://www.gnu.org or you can write to the Free Software Foundation, Inc., 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.}