.TH XaoS 6 "16 Jan 2003" "XaoS" "Demos"

.SH NAME
xaos - Fast interactive real-time fractal zoomer/morpher

.SH SYNOPSIS
xaos [options]

.SH DESCRIPTION

XaoS is a portable real-time interactive fractal zoomer/morpher.
The UNIX version works under X11, SVGA and text terminals.
If you don't know what a fractal is, or you want to know more about
XaoS features, you should see the animated tutorial. 
.B \ Run XaoS and press 'H' twice.
It is much more fun than reading the boring manual page :) and it supports foreign
languages. You might also want to read the
.B \ xaos.info 
file for some advanced stuff
(like how to write animations and tutorials manually, port or extend XaoS,
algorithms used etc.)

.SH "OPTIONS"
XaoS' options are divided into the following groups:
.TP
.B \ Ugly interface options
These options are common across all installations of XaoS because the only
interface available for now is the ugly interface.
.TP
.B \ Driver selection options
These options let you choose the graphics driver.
.TP
.B \ Driver dependent options
These options depend on available drivers.
.SH "SCREEN SIZE OPTIONS"
XaoS needs exact knowledge of the screen size to make random dot stereograms
and for choosing good viewing areas for fractals. This can be done in two ways,
by choosing screen size or choosing the pixel size. Screen size is best for fullscreen
drivers where resolution/pixel-size may be changed. On the other hand,
pixel size is best for windowed environments where some kind of virtual screen,
etc. could confuse calculation of pixel size from the screen size.
.TP
.B \-screenwidth
exact width of the screen in centimeters
.TP
.B \-screenheight
exact height of the screen in centimeters
.TP
.B \-pixelwidth
exact size of a pixel's width in centimeters
.TP
.B \-pixelheight
exact size of a pixel's height in centimeters
.SH "DRIVER SELECTION OPTIONS"
Every XaoS installation has some graphics drivers. Which are available depends on
which operating system you have, available libraries and configurations. XaoS
by default tries to enable the best available driver. So for example,
in the cas of GNU/Linux, it tests the drivers in the following order:
.br
SVGAlib
.br
X11
.br
curses
.br
The following options are used to control this operation:
.TP
.B \-driver    
This option lets you specify the driver to use and avoid autodetection.
.TP
.B \-list
List available drivers and then exit.

.SH "OTHER UI OPTIONS"
The remaining options are quite easy to understand and depend on XaoS configuration
and version, so I do not describe how to use them here.
.B \ xaos -help
for a complete list of options with descriptions.
.SH "BUGS"
There are no known bugs in this release. See the XaoS home-page 
at: 
.B \ http://xaos.sf.net
for a list of bugs with solutions. Please report bugs to 
the authors.
.SH "AUTHORS"
.B Maintainer:
.br
.B Jan Hubicka (jh@ucw.cz)
.br
.B smail:
.br
Jan Hubicka
.br
Dukelskych bojovniku 1944
.br
Tabor
.br
39003
.br
Czech Republic
.br
.br
.B Thomas Marsh (tmarsh@austion.ibm.com)
.br
See AUTHORS for full credits
